# Analysis next steps

## Species level analysis

### Alpha diversity

- Change colors, shape and fill to best answer our three main questions:
  - are there differences between ecotypes (flies that use different host plants: ch vs. co)
  - are there differences between the two sampling regions (flies from west of the baltic and flies from east of the baltic)
  - are there differences between populations where the host is in allopatry (only one host plant grows in that region) or in sympatry (both host plants grow in that region)?
- Run a linear model to for differences between populations

### Beta diversity 

- Change labels to best answer our three main questions. Maybe this means renaming each sample by population (ex. CHST_01). 

### PCA

- run PCA on each of the 3 thresholds we discussed:
  - Species in at least one sample
  - species in at least 30% of samples (threshold = 0.3)
  - Species in at least 50% of samples (threshold = 0.5)
- Again, experiment with color, shape, fill to help answer the question
  - extra challenge: add ellipses for each population using stat_ellipse(), which by default draws a 95% confidence level for a multivariate t-distribution (https://r-charts.com/correlation/scatter-plot-ellipses-ggplot2/)
- Create two plot panels (use ggpubr package, ggarrange())
  - for the main text of your report, focus on threshold 0.5. the first plot should show pc1 on the x, pc2 on the y; the second should show pc2 on the x, pc3 on the y
  - for the supplementary materials, create a larger panel with these same plots (pc1vpc2, pc2vpc3) at threshold 0, 0.3 and 0.5
  
### NMDS (if you have time and desire)
- use the NMDS from the vegan package (https://rpubs.com/CPEL/NMDS) to analyze the 3 matrices you made for the PCA. My understanding is that you can use the count data (no log2(x + 1) transformation required)

### most abundant species
It might be interesting fpr readers to see the 20 most abundant species. 

- subset the PCA matrix to keep only the 20 most abundant species. Use the median log-shifted counts to identify the 20 most abundant species.  
- create a heatmap showing the log-shifted abundance of these species for the 96 samples (similar to fig 1C in Jones et al. 2019, https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-019-39163-9#Tab1) 

## Family level analysis

- Repeat bracken at the taxonomic level of Family. 
- Recreate all of the plots using the output of this analysis

## Targeted analysis: 
We can also try focusing in on a genus or family of interest. You can use the bracken filter step to keep all reads from a genus or family of interest, for example the genus _Wolbachia_. 


