# Bioinfo next steps

1. Run alpha diversity script on all samples 
  - Shannon-weiner index
  - Inverse Simpson's index
2. Run beta diversity script:
  - First, run the script on a single pair of samples to check to see how long it takes and how big the output file is. 
  - If it is very fast and the output is small, go ahead and run the beta diversity script for all 4000+ pairs of samples. 
  - If it is slow and the output is large, run it on a subset of pairs from the populations:
    - CHST
    - CHSK
    - COSK
    - COGE
3. Using the species column and the estimated reads column from the bracken output, create a species count matrix from the bracken output that we can use to run PCA and/or NMDS
  - This will look something like:
  ```
    | Sample     | spp1 | spp2 | spp3 | ... | sppn (where n is the maximum number of species in all of your samples... I think 284 based on the wc -l script you ran today?)
    | P12002_101 | 26329| 18369| 14000| ... | NA   (not all the species will exist in all the samples. Using the script I _am going to send_* you, these can be coded with an NA or a 0)
    | P12002_102 | ...
    .
    .
    .
  ```
4. Using the script I _am going to send_* you, try to run a PCA on the species count matrix. 
  - Can you experiment with the script to change the colors and shapes so that we can see which points are CH and which points are CO? Which points are east and which are west? Which are allopatric and which are sympatric? 
5. Using the vignette I _am going to send_* you, try to code and run a NMDS analysis on the species count matrix. 
6. Write code in R that creates a data frame for your alpha diversity estimates with four columns, one with the sample name, one with the richness (total number of spp), one for the Shannon index value, and one for the Simpson index value. 
  - Here's an example with some made up numbers:
```
|Sample     | Richness | Shannon | InvSimpson |
|P12002_101 | 158      |    2.16 |      4.39  | 
|P12002_102 ...
.
.
.
```
7. Make a boxplot (https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/reference/geom_boxplot.html) for each metric (richness, shannon index and simpson index). You should put the populations on the x-axis. 
 - Again, experiment with color, shape and fill to differentiate host plant (CH vs CO), region (west vs east) and host overlap (allopatric vs sympatric). 

This seems good for now, we'll come back to running statistical analyses on alpha diversity and visualizing beta diversity with hierarchical clustering next week. 

*I am on the train just now and haven't had a chance to put together the R scripts, but will send them to you first thing tomorrow. 

# theory and writing next steps

The methods section is always the easiest place to start when writing a report. We usually use subheadings to organize the methods . Start filling in the information under the subheadings I have provided below. Feel free to change these headings if you think they should be different. Use examples from Canvas if you feel stuck on how the methods should be written. 

## Methods
### Read Trimming and quality assessment
### Assignment and quantification of microbial reads
(should include: kraken2, bracken, and filtering steps)
### Diversity analyses
(should include richness, alpha diversity, beta diversity)
### Statistical analyses
(start with pca and nmds, we'll add more later)


Here's another great paper that is conducting similar analyses to ours: 
Chen et al. 2018. Gut bacterial and fungal communities of the domesticated silkworm (Bombyx mori) and wild mulberry-feeding relatives. _The ISME Journal_. https://www-nature-com.ezp.sub.su.se/articles/s41396-018-0174-1
Take a look and see if there is any figure or analysis that seems like it would be a good addition to your report. 




