# 26 April - 3 May 2023

## Bioinfo next steps
No need to do everything here before next week, this is just a list of upcoming tasks

1. Trim all of the samples (not subsampled! :) )
2. Run Kraken2 on each of the trimmed read groups for each sample
3. Download KrakenTools: https://github.com/jenniferlu717/KrakenTools/
4. Merge the Kraken2 output reports for samples with more than one read group (like P12002_101) 
  - Use the python KrakenTools script `combine_kreports.py` with the flag `--only-combined`
  - More details: https://github.com/jenniferlu717/KrakenTools#combine_kreportspy
5. Install Bracken and run Bracken on each of the samples
  - Use the same database as for the Kraken2 command
  - For samples with more than one read group, run Bracken on the **merged** Kraken2 reports
  - More details: https://github.com/jenniferlu717/Bracken
6. Subset the Bracken output 
  - Use the KrakenTools script `filter_bracken_out.py`
  - exclude anything that mapped to human sequences (taxonomic id 9606), which is our only metazoan representative
  - More details here: https://github.com/jenniferlu717/KrakenTools#filter_bracken_outpy
7. Start preparing scripts to run the diversity analyses (`alpha_diversity.py`; `beta_diversity.py`)
  - `alpha_diversity.py` should be run on the Bracken output for **each** sample
  - `beta_diversity.py` will be run on the Bracken output for all possible **pairs** of samples 
    - for example, we will run it on sample 1 and sample 2, sample 1 and sample 3, ... sample 1 and sample 96

## Writing/theory next steps

The primary aim of our study is to evaluate whether microbial diversity is different among the populations and between the two specialist flies. That means we need to understand what 'diversity' is and how we can measure it. 

For next week, I want you to read through two different texts on species richness and diversity: 
1. Wilson & Gownaris. "Diversity Indices" https://bio.libretexts.org/Courses/Gettysburg_College/01%3A_Ecology_for_All/22%3A_Biodiversity/22.02%3A_Diversity_Indices
2. Jones et al. 2019. Scientific Reports. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-39163-9

write 1-3 sentence answers to the following questions: 
1. What is species richness? How does species diversity differ from species richness? 
2. Broadly, what does alpha diversity tell you? 
3. What is the difference between alpha and beta diversity? 
4. Based on Jones et al. 2019 or even just your own guesses/hypotheses, what are some reasons why microbiome *diversity* might differ between insects eating different plants? 
5. What do you think will be the major determinants of microbial diversity in our flies? host plant? population? east vs. west of the baltic? north vs. south? something else? why? relate your prediction to the results from Jones et al. 2019. 
6. For our meeting next week, make a list of at least five questions or things you found confusing about these two readings. 



